# eBird Rarity Viewer

## About the App

eBird Rarity Viewer is a Shiny web application designed for birders. It leverages eBird data to provide an interactive and intuitive visualization of recent rare bird sightings anywhere in the world. Users can explore sightings on a map, filter by region, date, or species, and dive deep into briding data analytics!


## App Structure

The application consists of several key components, each playing a vital role in its functionality:

`app.R`

- This is the main script of the Shiny application. It contains the user interface (`UI`) and server logic (`server`) of the app. The `UI` defines how the app looks, while the `server` handles the app's functionality and responsiveness to user input.

`global_functions_variables.R`

- This script provides support to `app.R` by defining custom functions and variables. These functions and variables are essential for various operations within the app, such as data processing and API interactions.

`scripts/get_all_region_codes.R`

- This script is responsible for fetching all possible region and subregion information from eBird. The data fetched by this script eventually populates the dropdown menus in the app (app.R), allowing users to select specific regions for eBird data. Once fetched, the region information is exported to `files/region_descriptors.csv`.

`files/region_descriptors.csv`

- This CSV file, generated by `get_all_region_codes.R`, contains the descriptors for each region and subregion as provided by eBird viz the API 2.0. It is used within the app for user selections in the dropdown menu.

`files/taxonomy.csv`

- This file contains the entire eBird taxonomy as of January 7, 2024. It was fetched from the eBird API 2.0, a process that can be efficiently handled using the `vroom` package in R. The taxonomy data is crucial for the app's functionality, particularly for features related to species information.

`static/js/gtag.js`

- This file is used within the `app.R` UI to integrate Google Analytics into the application. This JavaScript file contains the necessary code for enabling Google Analytics tracking. By including this script, the app can collect and report data on relevant user metrics. This integration allows for further analysis of app usage, which can be valuable for further development and enhancements of the app.

Each of these components plays a crucial role in the app's functionality, working together to provide an interactive and user-friendly experience for exploring eBird data. The remaining files are typically propogated automatically by RStudio, Shiny, and GitHub, and do not need to be modified.


## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- R (version 4.2.1 or higher)
- RStudio


### Installation

1. Clone the repository: 
```bash
git clone https://github.com/GatesDupont/rbm.git
```

2. Open the project in RStudio.
3. Install the required R packages:

```R
install.packages(c("shiny", "tidyverse", "leaflet", ...))
```


### Setting Up API Key

1. Obtain an API key from [eBird](https://documenter.getpostman.com/view/664302/S1ENwy59).
2. Create a file named `config.yml` in the root directory of the project.
3. Add your API key to `config.yml`:

```YML
default:
  ebird_api_key: "your_api_key_here"
```

## Usage

- Open the app in RStudio and run it.
- The interface is intuitive: select your filters and observe the map and dropdown menu updating in real time.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License.

## Acknowledgments

- Thanks to the eBird team for providing the API.



